You just learned about how certain types of machine learning
algorithms may be useful for different clinical applications,
and here we're going to dive deeper into how we assess and interpret their performance.
These performance interpretations will then allow us to recommend
how an algorithm should be used in a clinical decision-making setting.
One of the biggest challenges that you may face as an algorithm developer for
2D medical imaging is in obtaining disease labels for your images.
With other types of non-clinical images, for example,
cats versus dogs, it doesn't take an expert to
determine if there is a cat or a dog in the image.
However, it's not so easy with
medical imaging because you need experts to label your images.
These experts are radiologists whose time is expensive and limited.
We'll talk more in Lesson 3 about other ways to generate
labels to use in your machine learning assessments.
After we get these labels though,
we must evaluate how our algorithm performs.
For classification algorithms, the performance is
evaluated by comparing its prediction to the real label.
Consider an algorithm that's intended to classify if cancer is present in images.
Cancer is denoted as positive if it's in the image,
and the image is negative if there is no cancer in the image.
If the algorithm predicts the presence of cancer and the label agrees,
then we would say this prediction made by the algorithm is a true positive.
If the algorithm predicts the absence of cancer,
but the clinical label disagrees,
we would say that this prediction by the algorithm is a false negative.
If the algorithm predicts the presence of cancer and the labels as the same,
we would say this prediction is a true negative.
Finally, if the algorithm says that there is cancer in
the image but the label says that there's no sign of cancer,
we would call this prediction made by the algorithm a false positive.
We can arrange the table we just obtained into
a two-by-two matrix that contains the same information.
We call this matrix a confusion matrix.
Confusion matrices are very important since they provide us with
the information about where the algorithm does right and where it does wrong.
In classification problems, we want to work specifically with positive or negative cases.
Sensitivity is a metric that will tell us among all the positive cases in the data set,
how many of them were successfully identified by the algorithm.
In other words, the true positives.
Sensitivity measures the proportion of accurately identified positive cases.
Mathematically, sensitivity is the number of
accurately identified positive cases over all of the positive cases in the data set.
It is often also referred to as the true positive rate or recall.
Recall that sensitivity measures the proportion of accurately identified positive cases.
You can think of a highly sensitive test as being very good for ruling out a disease.
Algorithms with high sensitivity are good for catching actual cases of a disease.
A test with 100 percent sensitivity will
successfully recognize all patients with the disease.
So if someone has a negative results on a highly sensitive test,
it is extremely likely that they don't have the disease.
A high sensitivity test is reliable when the result is negative,
since it rarely misdiagnosis those who have the disease.
A clinical situation where this might be useful is for a screening study,
where your goal is to make sure that you're not missing
patients who are a suspect for a disease.
Specificity is another metric.
This tells us among all of the negative cases in the data set,
how many of them were successfully identified by the algorithm.
In other words, the true negatives.
Sensitivity measures the proportion of accurately identified negative cases.
Mathematically, specificity is the number of
accurately identified negative cases over all of the negative cases in the data set.
So recall that specificity measures
the proportion of accurately identified negative cases.
What this means is that you can think of
highly specific tests as being good for ruling in disease.
A test with 100 percent specificity will recognize all patients without the disease.
If someone has a positive results on a highly specific test,
it's extremely likely that they have the disease.
A high specificity test is reliable when the test is positive,
since it rarely misdiagnosis those who don't have the disease.
A clinical situation where this might be useful is in an early detection pregnancy test.
If it's positive, you are definitely pregnant.
However, if it's negative,
it might not be that meaningful,
and you may need a second type of test to confirm if you are pregnant or not.
We just went over how to assess performances for classification algorithms.
Here we will talk a little bit about
performance assessments for segmentation and localization algorithms.
We won't dive too deep,
but an overview is provided here.
In this image, the blue colored area is showing the chest wall,
which is a muscle that we might want to separate from
the breast tissue as identified by a segmentation algorithm.
An expert labeler has also segmented the chest wall in orange.
Performance of segmentation algorithms is assessed by calculating
the overlap between the algorithm segmentation and the expert labeler segmentation,
which is shown here in red.
This calculated overlap is called the dice coefficient.
To represent the dice coefficient using a mathematical equation,
it is two times the intersection of X and Y divided by the sum of X and Y,
where X is the algorithm output and Y is the label.